We're recruitment secretaries for Informatics Rugby.
NOTE CONF
We're a casual intramural rugby team created, um, last year.
And, um, we're here to talk to you a little
NOTE CONF
bit about what we do, hopefully recruit you.
Um, we play games most Wednesdays at Peppermill.
NOTE CONF
We train most Sundays, um, in the Meadows, just out
the back of the library.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Uh, just exactly what he said.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have a QR code up there on the
screen.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a mix of different subjects, but it is
supposed to be informatics.
NOTE CONF
Hence why we're here talking to you.
Uh, training as a mix of contact, fitness, skill level
NOTE CONF
building, uh, then, like, like and set up for ML
on Wednesdays against other subjects to play.
NOTE CONF
You will need, um, rugby boots and you will need,
uh, gum guard if you want to take part in
NOTE CONF
contact.
We also have socials every Wednesday and Sunday after whatever's
NOTE CONF
been on that day.
and it would be really great to see all the
NOTE CONF
majority of you here.
And for anyone who's not interested in rugby, if you
NOTE CONF
look up and from our sport on Instagram, you'll find
links to various different sports and depending on what you're
NOTE CONF
interested in.
So yeah, thanks guys.
NOTE CONF
Hope to see all of you there.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Rugby of course, is not the only sport.
If you haven't realised there are lots of sports found
NOTE CONF
here.
My sport is target shooting.
NOTE CONF
Edinburgh University Rifle Club is or.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's 30 years since I was last in it, but
it's a great place.
NOTE CONF
Used to be.
Um, so we started on some content yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Fairly mild content, especially if you've done computer science.
And let me just recap a bit.
NOTE CONF
So generally speaking, at the start of each lecture I
take any questions you have on what happened in the
NOTE CONF
previous lecture.
So yesterday we were talking about the notion of binary
NOTE CONF
information, the notion of bit, the use of decision trees
or yes, no questions in a particular order to allow
NOTE CONF
us to assign binary codes to things, because we're going
to be working entirely in terms of true and false
NOTE CONF
for most of this course.
And yesterday one of you asked me if I could
NOTE CONF
talk louder.
The volume on this thing is hiked up to maximum.
NOTE CONF
Is it okay at the moment or should I increase
my speaking volume as well?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yep.
NOTE CONF
A bit of a For tickle in the throat today.
So are there any questions about the stuff we covered
NOTE CONF
yesterday?
If you have any uncertainties at all, and let me
NOTE CONF
remind you that if you have a question, probably 20
other people have the questions.
NOTE CONF
So never feel shy about asking a question.
There are no stupid questions.
NOTE CONF
It's possible for me to give a stupid answer.
Okay, so you know you have a tutorial next week
NOTE CONF
and you also know that you haven't been allocated to
them yet.
NOTE CONF
We are hoping very much that you will be allocated
to them before they happen.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's a little thing that some of you might
like to do.
NOTE CONF
I guess you watch films on phones or possibly even
laptops, but maybe tablets.
NOTE CONF
in theory.
How many possible one hour HD digital movies are there?
NOTE CONF
So in order to do that, you need to do
the kind of estimate and calculation that hopefully you learned
NOTE CONF
in the sciences.
Um, have a go and talk with your colleagues in
NOTE CONF
tutorial and see how many different answers you get.
Experience tells me that some of you are going to
NOTE CONF
do it right now, and we'll have an answer in
five minutes, but if I have time at the end
NOTE CONF
of the lecture, then I'll take any answers from the
class.
NOTE CONF
Now, I don't know what the answer is, I can't
remember.
NOTE CONF
I have a note somewhere, but frankly, who cares?
But it's quite an alarming number.
NOTE CONF
So what I want to do today is move on
to something which is actually more about what we're doing
NOTE CONF
in this course and is more fun.
Yesterday was just setting up the framework that we're only
NOTE CONF
going to be thinking about true and false things.
So now I want to talk a little bit about
NOTE CONF
logic.
I said that logic was the language of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Why do we need a language of reasoning?
Because the language we speak and write is often ambiguous.
NOTE CONF
It's often imprecise, which is usually often a good thing.
And it's also very verbose and long winded.
NOTE CONF
It takes us a lot of words to say something
that could be specified precisely.
NOTE CONF
And this is true even when people are trying really,
really hard not to be any of those things.
NOTE CONF
And this is why we have lawyers.
And unfortunately, lawyers do not get trained in logic.
NOTE CONF
And over the last four weeks, I had a very
painful experience with a lawyer who doesn't understand basic logic.
NOTE CONF
So logic is useful if you ever have to argue.
Why is logic core to a computer science course?
NOTE CONF
Because informatics is fundamentally mathematics and logic applied to things
that are going to do computing for us.
NOTE CONF
And the reason we have mathematics and logic is because
they enable us to talk clearly, precisely and concisely.
NOTE CONF
But perhaps more importantly, they require us to talk clearly,
precisely and concisely.
NOTE CONF
It's quite hard to be imprecise in mathematics.
It's possible to write down a precise mathematical statement without
NOTE CONF
understanding what you're writing down.
And I imagine that you've had that experience at some
NOTE CONF
stage in your mathematics learning.
But what you wrote down had a meaning, even if
NOTE CONF
it wasn't the one you intended.
So logic is a language, an artificial language intended to
NOTE CONF
achieve precise communication about a narrow range of things.
It's a very old subject in Western European civilisation.
NOTE CONF
It's about 2500 years old.
In other civilisations, it's older, although not developed in the
NOTE CONF
same way.
And we're going to be starting with something which most
NOTE CONF
of you have probably seen before.
If you've done computer science at school, you've probably seen
NOTE CONF
this before.
If you haven't, you might not.
NOTE CONF
So if I say propositional logic, Boolean logic, how many
of you know what I mean?
NOTE CONF
How many of you think you should know what I
mean?
NOTE CONF
If you remembered what happened last year or two years
ago?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so not as many, which could mean computer science
syllabuses have changed.
NOTE CONF
So yesterday we were talking about reducing our conversation to
a series of yes no statements or questions.
NOTE CONF
Well, the question is something that comes from a statement,
and we're going to use a technical term proposition.
NOTE CONF
So it's written in purple.
It's something I'm defining for the purposes of this course.
NOTE CONF
So a proposition is something that is a statement.
It's simple in some way.
NOTE CONF
And it's either true or false.
So here are some examples of statements that might be
NOTE CONF
considered to be either true or false.
The moon is round.
NOTE CONF
It is raining here and now I like mooncakes.
That book is yellow.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I said that those were simple statements, but
they're not really simple statements.
NOTE CONF
Is the moon round?
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's sort of round in much the same
way that the Earth is sort of round.
NOTE CONF
It depends what you mean by round, doesn't it?
In most useful conversations, the moon is round.
NOTE CONF
But if by round you mean perfectly spherical, then of
course it isn't.
NOTE CONF
So there's an complexity there.
What do we mean by round the moon?
NOTE CONF
I suppose we agreed.
Is it raining here or now?
NOTE CONF
Well, that depends whether by here and now I mean
inside this lecture theatre or whether I mean up there
NOTE CONF
outside.
So again, that apparently simple statement has a lot of
NOTE CONF
external information.
I like mooncakes.
NOTE CONF
Well, I'm the one speaking, so presumably I'm the only
one who can answer that.
NOTE CONF
And the answer to it is in fact, yes.
Until I ate one too many and then I haven't
NOTE CONF
been able to eat one since.
Um, that book is yellow.
NOTE CONF
That's a quite a complex linguistic statement because it has
that in it.
NOTE CONF
So there's a lot of language in there which is
telling you which book I'm talking about.
NOTE CONF
I don't actually have any books.
Anybody have a yellow book?
NOTE CONF
No, sir.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Is that book yellow?
Well.
NOTE CONF
Or that book is yellow?
Yep.
NOTE CONF
A true false statement.
So all of that complexity is not logical.
NOTE CONF
Or at least it's not logical in the sense of
logic that we're going to be talking about it.
NOTE CONF
It's more to do with linguistics.
Semantics is the area of linguistics we might be talking
NOTE CONF
about.
What does a word mean?
NOTE CONF
So that's not the kind of logic we're going to
assume that we know what we're talking about, and all
NOTE CONF
our questions have definitive answers about whether they're yes or
no.
NOTE CONF
Um, any questions or challenges about that?
So quite often during the course, I'm going to make
NOTE CONF
statements and some of them will be obvious and some
of them will be obvious and false.
NOTE CONF
So if you think I might have made an obviously
a statement that is false, do shout because it might
NOTE CONF
be deliberate.
Um, I don't have any plan for this lecture as
NOTE CONF
far as I know.
So because we're working as mathematicians or logicians or whatever.
NOTE CONF
We're going to introduce symbolic notation.
And there's a lot of useful convention that we use
NOTE CONF
in maths and in logic to save words.
So conventionally I'm going to use uppercase Letters from about
NOTE CONF
the middle of the alphabet from Pcast.
And those are going to be things that stand for
NOTE CONF
propositions.
And most of the time, I don't really care what
NOTE CONF
propositions they stand for, because I'm going to be reasoning
abstractly about what we can do with propositions.
NOTE CONF
But occasionally I might want them to talk about a
particular proposition, such as the moon is round.
NOTE CONF
So the key things are propositions or statements that are
true or false.
NOTE CONF
And I'm going to use letters such as P and
Q to range over them, as we say.
NOTE CONF
One of the things that we experience in this course
is that Don and I are both both mathematicians, computer
NOTE CONF
scientists, whatever you want to call us of 40 or
50 years standing, which means we have forgotten what it
NOTE CONF
was like not to be a mathematician or logician.
So if I use a word and you don't know
NOTE CONF
what it means, or you don't know what it means
in the context.
NOTE CONF
Shout because there will be others, and it will simply
mean that I've forgotten that it wasn't taught in school.
NOTE CONF
So I try to avoid these because every year I
learn a new one.
NOTE CONF
But please shout as soon as there is anything you
don't understand.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what can we do with propositions?
The statement that the moon is round is not all
NOTE CONF
that interesting.
Well, I suppose it is interesting because it tells us
NOTE CONF
a lot about the nature of the universe and the
solar system and the way it formed.
NOTE CONF
But for more complex forms of reasoning, we usually want
to be able to start with some proposition and end
NOTE CONF
up with another proposition, because we know something and we
want to work something out from it.
NOTE CONF
For example.
If you get 71% on an assessment, then that is
NOTE CONF
a grade A, so that's a rule that is actually
embedded somewhere in the university's regulations.
NOTE CONF
And there's a reasoning process that takes you from Mark
greater than 71 to grade is a.
NOTE CONF
Um, so much of logic is about combining propositions in
some sense.
NOTE CONF
Almost all of logic is about combining combining propositions.
So the question is how many ways can we combine
NOTE CONF
them.
And this is where things can get a bit confusing
NOTE CONF
to start with, because we use words in logic with
very specific meanings, although those words are also everyday words,
NOTE CONF
where they also have a meaning that we think we
understand and that may not be precisely the same.
NOTE CONF
So one of the main combinations in logic is, and
I think we all know what and means in most
NOTE CONF
circumstances.
So if I say p and q, I mean that
NOTE CONF
p is q and q is true.
And that sounds like a circular definition, right?
NOTE CONF
But it is because I have to define logic in
terms of something.
NOTE CONF
Where things get slightly more interesting will be a bit
in the next operator.
NOTE CONF
But another thing I need to warn you about logic
is that there are lots and lots of different notations.
NOTE CONF
Because it's an old subject.
Modern logic is not so old.
NOTE CONF
Modern logic is about 150 years old, but it's changed
a great deal over those 150 years.
NOTE CONF
And people's preferred notations vary.
So when I want to write and and I'm talking
NOTE CONF
in logical sense, I will usually use a symbol, because
that makes it clear that it's the precise meaning.
NOTE CONF
This thing which I'm going to pronounce and and various
people pronounce in various other ways, is the symbol that
NOTE CONF
we use in this course.
Other people, typically in a slightly older and more philosophical
NOTE CONF
tradition, will usually use the and symbol, the ampersand symbol.
Um IDE or curiosity?
NOTE CONF
How many of you know what ampersand means as a
word?
NOTE CONF
So you know it means this symbol.
But do you know why it means that symbol?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, it used to be a letter.
Um, so I'm actually talking about the word ampersand.
NOTE CONF
So why is this particular symbol called an ampersand?
Um, It's a curious thing to know.
NOTE CONF
May be useful for pub pub quizzes.
Ampersand is actually a contraction by natural usage for the
NOTE CONF
phrase and per se, and per se is Latin, which
means by itself.
NOTE CONF
So this means and by itself.
And this is the symbol that by itself means and
NOTE CONF
um, and that also demonstrates interesting linguistics things because we
have and pair turning into Ampere.
NOTE CONF
So that's a process of assimilation which is common in
language.
NOTE CONF
So it's a nice word useful for both basic phonology
and linguistics.
NOTE CONF
You will also see the dot, the dot you're familiar
with as a sign for multiplication, and we'll see a
NOTE CONF
bit later why and is a bit like multiplication so
and is pretty straightforward.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about and.
We can write down a precise definition of what it
NOTE CONF
means using a truth table.
So who knows.
NOTE CONF
Truth tables should be a lot more of you.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Okay, so those of you who haven't seen truth tables,
NOTE CONF
they're very boring things.
I write in the columns the values of P and
NOTE CONF
I write in the row, the value of q.
And in the table I just write down what the
NOTE CONF
value of p and q is.
So false and false is false.
NOTE CONF
False and true is true.
True and false is false.
NOTE CONF
False.
True and true is true.
NOTE CONF
So it's just a tabulation, the logical equivalent of a
multiplication table.
NOTE CONF
A more interesting conjunction is or.
So when I say p or q and the word
NOTE CONF
disjunction is the fancy Latin word for putting two propositions
together with or p or true q is true exactly
NOTE CONF
when at least one of p and q is true.
And you'll notice I've already confused matters by saying at
NOTE CONF
least one of P and Q when I'm talking about
or.
NOTE CONF
But I hope you see what I'm meaning there.
So P or q is true.
NOTE CONF
If p is true or q is true, or both
are true.
NOTE CONF
Does that match with the way you use or in
everyday language?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Shout!
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So sometimes not always, but probably more often when we
NOTE CONF
use or in everyday language, we mean either or one
or the other, but not both.
NOTE CONF
So that's something to be careful to remember.
In logical usage, the plain or always means one or
NOTE CONF
the other, or both.
So an example of.
NOTE CONF
That might be.
You will not get an MSC distinction if you don't
NOTE CONF
get a distinction on the coursework, or you don't get
a distinction on the exam.
NOTE CONF
So in the way our MSC works, to get a
distinction, you have to get a distinction both from the
NOTE CONF
dissertation and the exam.
So if you fail either of them or both, then
NOTE CONF
you don't get a distinction.
But frequently in everyday life we mean one or the
NOTE CONF
other.
So if somebody offers you an apple or an orange,
NOTE CONF
then you're going to get one unless you explicitly say,
actually, I'd like both, which may not be what they
NOTE CONF
meant to offer.
And again, there are many symbols in logic.
NOTE CONF
In modern logic, we tend to like this symbol.
Computer scientists tend to like the symbol.
NOTE CONF
It's the other way round.
I'm going to pronounce it, or some people will call
NOTE CONF
it V.
The same people who write the ampersand for and will
NOTE CONF
often write a vertical stroke for or not quite so
common.
NOTE CONF
You will also see plus because we will see that
or is the logical equivalent of addition in some ways.
NOTE CONF
But I'm going to use this one.
We can write a truth table for it.
NOTE CONF
Looks like this.
False and false is false.
NOTE CONF
False and true is true.
True and false is true.
NOTE CONF
True and true is true.
Um, so any any questions about or.
NOTE CONF
The only catch is remembering that it includes the case
when both are true.
NOTE CONF
If I put the truth tables for and and or
side by side, what do you notice about them?
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
They're similar.
NOTE CONF
Can anybody say more precisely?
Where?
NOTE CONF
In the Lord there are three.
In the end, there's only one truth.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
And if you look, you see that this one is
NOTE CONF
got from this one by flipping it about the axis
and swapping.
NOTE CONF
True and false.
So that general thing is called duality.
NOTE CONF
And I'm not going to talk much about it now,
but a bit later in the course we will talk
NOTE CONF
about duality quite a lot.
Really what this is saying is that false and or
NOTE CONF
go together in the same way that true and and
go together.
NOTE CONF
So you'll see more of this later on, and eventually
it will become embedded in your brain so that you
NOTE CONF
can think about such things automatically.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Are we doing.
There's another proposition way of combining propositions that we use
NOTE CONF
a lot in everyday life, and that's denying something.
So not the negation of a proposition is true exactly
NOTE CONF
when the proposition is false, which I hope is what
we think not means in everyday life.
NOTE CONF
And again, there are lots and lots of symbols for
it.
NOTE CONF
So the one that we like and the modern logicians
tend to use is this thing which we just pronounce
NOTE CONF
not.
It probably has some other name that I don't know.
NOTE CONF
Older logicians will use the twiddle, and if you want
to be formal about it, it's called a swung dash.
NOTE CONF
But twiddle is easier.
Sometimes we will use an over bar to say not
NOTE CONF
p, and we will do that sometimes in the course
because it has its uses.
NOTE CONF
But our main symbol for negation is this, um, dash
with a tic at the end.
NOTE CONF
We can write a truth table for it.
It's a simpler truth table because there's only P, so
NOTE CONF
not p is true if p is false, and false
if p is true.
NOTE CONF
Um, do you think there's anything complicated about not.
Is it generally easier to show that something is true,
NOTE CONF
or to show that something is not true?
If it's not true?
NOTE CONF
Do you think it's easier to show that it's not
true?
NOTE CONF
All right.
So let me give you an example against that.
NOTE CONF
So my unpleasant legal experience over the last four weeks
because I've been buying a place, and one of the
NOTE CONF
issues that arose was whether there had been any alterations
to the property since it was converted into a flat.
NOTE CONF
I had an annoying, pedantic lawyer who said there might
have been.
NOTE CONF
Is it easier to demonstrate that an alteration has been
done, or to demonstrate that nothing has been done?
NOTE CONF
I mean, if an alteration has been done, then at
least you can see it.
NOTE CONF
But how do you look at the whole thing and
say nothing has been done?
NOTE CONF
Um, so there is a sense in which this is
true in logic as well, but that's a more complex
NOTE CONF
form of logic.
So proving something is something is usually easier than proving
NOTE CONF
that you can't prove something.
But proving something false is a different matter.
NOTE CONF
But for most purposes negation is easy because we know
what true and false are.
NOTE CONF
We have possibilities true and false.
And if we have the negation, we just flip them.
NOTE CONF
Where it gets complicated is if you have a don't
know.
NOTE CONF
So I don't know whether something is true, but then
I also don't know whether it's false.
NOTE CONF
And so negation becomes more interesting.
There are logics for dealing with that which I might
NOTE CONF
possibly mention right at the end of the course, but
for our purposes logic is very straightforward.
NOTE CONF
So I've given you three ways of combining propositions and
or and not.
NOTE CONF
So if we have combinations then we can build up
complex things.
NOTE CONF
In basic arithmetic you have plus minus times divide and
you build up complex expressions in some time, which is
NOTE CONF
probably fading from your memories.
You had to do evaluate expressions by hand, whereas now
NOTE CONF
you probably use calculators or hopefully not.
ChatGPT.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I can write down an expression like that.
So if I say, what does that mean?
NOTE CONF
What do you say?
I want to go somewhere else.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Or not?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's basically reading the statement.
What does the statement say?
NOTE CONF
Notice the brackets.
So we use brackets in logic in the same way
NOTE CONF
that we use them in arithmetic.
This means the sort of main operator here is an
NOTE CONF
or.
So I'm saying that either this is true or this
NOTE CONF
is true or both.
And this thing on the left says that both P
NOTE CONF
and Q are true.
And this thing on the left says that it's not
NOTE CONF
the case that both R and S are true.
So rather useless statement because you don't know what p,
NOTE CONF
q, r and s is.
But the point is that we can take arbitrary propositions
NOTE CONF
and build them up in the normal mathematical notation with
brackets in order to group things together.
NOTE CONF
So hopefully that's just familiar notation, maybe with some new
symbols.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about it or comments.
Do you think I need to tell you any more
NOTE CONF
ways of combining propositions?
A couple more.
NOTE CONF
Do I have to or are they just handy?
So actually, these four propositions are enough for all the
NOTE CONF
possible ways you can combine propositions.
And it's a reasonably good exercise to check that.
NOTE CONF
So I mean maybe not check it in detail, but
go and convince yourself that every possible way of combining
NOTE CONF
two propositions can be written in terms of and or
not, but in everyday reasoning, and especially in mathematical everyday
NOTE CONF
reasoning.
There's a combination of propositions that we use a lot
NOTE CONF
more than the others, in fact, and that is if
then implication.
NOTE CONF
So if I write if P, then q, then what
I mean is that if whenever p is true, q
NOTE CONF
has to be true.
If P, then q.
NOTE CONF
That is the combination you use in most of the
mathematical reasoning you do, because all mathematical, all mathematical theorems
NOTE CONF
have the form.
If something is true, then something else is true.
NOTE CONF
And again, there are lots and lots and lots of
symbols.
NOTE CONF
So you will see people using a single arrow.
You will see people using a double arrow.
NOTE CONF
You'll see people using this thing which looks like a
back, which looks like a superset symbol.
NOTE CONF
There's a reason for that.
And many others.
NOTE CONF
The one we're going to use is the single arrow.
And again, this is an operator which can be defined
NOTE CONF
with a truth table.
It works like this.
NOTE CONF
So this is p implies q.
False implies true.
NOTE CONF
True implies false is false.
True implies true is true.
NOTE CONF
So look carefully at this first row here.
Does that actually make sense to you?
NOTE CONF
Good.
How many other people find it slightly disturbing?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Why is it a bit disturbing?
Yeah, because he is false.
NOTE CONF
If P is false, shouldn't you be false as well?
And this truth table says that if P is false,
NOTE CONF
then it's okay for Q to be either false or
true.
NOTE CONF
So this is the single biggest difference between logic and
everyday life.
NOTE CONF
So to give you an example, here is an if
then statement with two propositions in it.
NOTE CONF
And I want you to tell me whether the if
then statement is true.
NOTE CONF
If the moon is made of green cheese, then I
am a banana.
NOTE CONF
It's true.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Which seems a bit odd.
Um.
NOTE CONF
The reason it's.
Why do we do this?
NOTE CONF
Fundamentally, we do this because things work better if we
do that.
NOTE CONF
And the real reason we do it is that we're
just talking about yes and no.
NOTE CONF
So we don't have any idea of an actual connection
between things.
NOTE CONF
So the statement I just made is absurd, because there's
no possible reasonable connection between the moon being made of
NOTE CONF
green cheese and me being a banana.
I mean, unless maybe you say the only way the
NOTE CONF
moon can be made of green cheese is if an
evil wizard has done it, and he might turn me
NOTE CONF
into a banana.
So the kind of logic we're dealing with has no
NOTE CONF
conception of connections between propositions.
It only knows whether they are true or false.
NOTE CONF
And in that setting, if you don't know anything about
if you know that P is false, then the safest
NOTE CONF
thing to do is say, I don't know anything about
Q.
NOTE CONF
It could be true.
It could be false.
NOTE CONF
So if then is a statement about P being true,
making a positive requirement that Q is true and not
NOTE CONF
the other way round?
Not about the negative.
NOTE CONF
There's a buzzword for this.
It's called the problem of material implication.
NOTE CONF
So this kind of implication is called material implication because
it only looks at the matter, the content of the
NOTE CONF
proposition, and doesn't think at all about whether there's any
sensible relation between them.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at what P implies, Q says,
if we look at that truth table, consider this statement
NOTE CONF
here.
Either q is true or p is false, q or
NOTE CONF
not p so Q is true or p is false.
If you check this formula against that truth table, you'll
NOTE CONF
see that they're the same.
So we don't actually need the implication operator around.
NOTE CONF
We could always just write it out like this.
However we tend to think in terms of implication.
NOTE CONF
We think in terms of one thing implying another.
So this is a very useful operator to have for
NOTE CONF
the purpose of human reasoning.
But it is also important in a lot of cases
NOTE CONF
to be able instantly to convert it to this form.
So try to get that into your brains now.
NOTE CONF
And again, just a side note going on to this.
The reason this first row looks odd is because it
NOTE CONF
says false implies everything.
Whatever you form, whatever you have on the right of
NOTE CONF
the arrow, false implies it.
At the moment we're only talking about propositions, but later
NOTE CONF
in the course we'll get on to proving things, proving
theorems, taking some assumptions.
NOTE CONF
And in normal mathematics, in normal logic, it's also the
case that if you can prove false, then you can
NOTE CONF
prove everything.
So the Latin term for that which was popular when
NOTE CONF
logic was a philosophical subject, is ex Folsom quarterly bit
out of falsehood.
NOTE CONF
You can get anything you like.
And the reason that's used a lot is because it's
NOTE CONF
what underlies proof by contradiction.
So I guess in your school maths you have done
NOTE CONF
how many people have done proof by contradiction at school?
So most but not all.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You're going to see more of it.
NOTE CONF
Proof by contradiction actually relies on force behaving in this
way.
NOTE CONF
There is a more refined branch of reasoning and logic
where that's no longer true, but that's a harder to
NOTE CONF
deal with.
Okay, any questions about if and then.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Was that a question?
NOTE CONF
But.
You have to shout really loud from back there.
NOTE CONF
Or, you know, you almost.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
How is that possible?
Well, just so just check the truth tables.
NOTE CONF
So take this expression, write down the truth table for
it, and you'll see that it's the same as that.
NOTE CONF
But if you think about it without looking at the
truth table P implies q.
NOTE CONF
That means if p is true, then q has to
be true.
NOTE CONF
If q is true, then we have nothing to check
because p can be true or false.
NOTE CONF
If Q is not true, then P has to be
false because otherwise P would be true, which would force
NOTE CONF
Q to be true.
So you can do it by reasoning or you can
NOTE CONF
just check the truth table.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's all the logical combinators that we're going to
use.
NOTE CONF
A little bit later, we'll introduce 1 or 2 more
that are useful for special purposes, but these are the
NOTE CONF
main ones we use when we write down systems of
reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Now I want to just make an observation.
Does everybody know Venn diagrams?
NOTE CONF
Does anybody not know Venn diagrams?
That's good because we told you to read about them
NOTE CONF
before coming here.
So, um, if you look at logic, it looks very
NOTE CONF
much like Venn diagram P and q looks like p
intersect q, p or q looks like p union Q,
NOTE CONF
not P looks like complement of P.
That is not, of course, a coincidence.
NOTE CONF
So what's the meaning of P?
Well, the meaning of p is the things of which
NOTE CONF
p is true.
And then what's the meaning of P and q?
NOTE CONF
The meaning of p and q is the things that
have of which p is true, and q is true,
NOTE CONF
and that is the intersection of the things for which
p and q, and the set of things for which
NOTE CONF
q are true.
So fundamentally and an intersection of the same or and
NOTE CONF
union of the same, not and complement of the same,
it's just that up here we're thinking about abstract propositions.
NOTE CONF
And down here we're thinking about the sets of things
that have that proposition as one of their characteristics.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just mentioning this.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Absolute values.
Um, so kind of a side note.
NOTE CONF
So I'm this double bar is a computer science notation
for the meaning of p.
NOTE CONF
And by definition it's the set of things of which
p holds.
NOTE CONF
So if I have a universe, the meaning of p
in that universe is the set of objects at which
NOTE CONF
P is true.
And that's that's how we actually define logic applied to
NOTE CONF
universes when we're being really, really formal, which we're not
going to do in this course because we're just going
NOTE CONF
to assume we know what it means.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's propositions, simple statements.
You don't get very far with simple statements.
NOTE CONF
So in everyday life we want to make statements not
just true or false, but we want to make statements
NOTE CONF
about things.
So if we look back at the proposition I had
NOTE CONF
I said the moon is round.
Well, obviously that breaks down into two things.
NOTE CONF
There's the thing I'm talking about the moon, and there's
the thing I'm saying about it, which is is round.
NOTE CONF
if you learned the grammar of your own language or
any other language in a traditional style, you may be
NOTE CONF
familiar with terms like subject, predicate, and complement.
How many are familiar with that as a grammar term?
NOTE CONF
Yep, there isn't enough old fashioned grammar teaching in logic.
We sometimes talk about such things.
NOTE CONF
So in logic, a predicate is a proposition about things.
So it's the proposition is round about a thing.
NOTE CONF
And the point of a predicate is that we can
apply it to lots of different things.
NOTE CONF
So the predicate round can be applied to the moon
to say the moon is round.
NOTE CONF
And I can also apply it to the sun and
say the sun is round.
NOTE CONF
So now I've abstracted away from particular objects, and I
have a notion of predicate which is about properties of
NOTE CONF
objects.
So.
NOTE CONF
Is round is something that takes one argument.
As we say, it takes the object I'm talking about
NOTE CONF
the predicate like is something that has two arguments because
the statement I like mooncakes can be plugged in with
NOTE CONF
different things for AI and mooncake.
Um, I don't know.
NOTE CONF
You like rigatoni.
So like is what we call a two place predicate.
NOTE CONF
So individual things might have names like the moon or
eye.
NOTE CONF
And there's a misprint there.
And we have variables.
NOTE CONF
We will use variables x and y lowercase x and
y.
NOTE CONF
So this is the same kind of variable that you're
familiar with.
NOTE CONF
In mathematical usage you use a variable to range over
numbers in a problem.
NOTE CONF
So x and y refers to some arbitrary thing.
And we will represent predicates by the same letters as
NOTE CONF
the propositions.
But we will give them arguments as well.
NOTE CONF
So if p is a unary predicate like is round,
then p of x is a proposition, and it means
NOTE CONF
that the predicate p is true of the thing x.
So for example, is round applied to the moon, likes
NOTE CONF
is a binary predicate, takes an x and a y,
and its true if x likes y.
NOTE CONF
So this would be likes I comma mooncakes.
Is that a reasonably comfortable notation?
NOTE CONF
Are there any issues with that notation.
It should be yeah.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Um, there are an awful lot of Latin and Greek
words floating around in mathematics in the days when everybody
NOTE CONF
learned Latin and Greek at school.
That was fine, but that's no longer the case, and
NOTE CONF
many of you are from places where it would be
quite reasonable, for you have learned Classical Arabic or Sanskrit
NOTE CONF
or Middle Chinese instead of Latin or Greek.
So unary means one issue.
NOTE CONF
Binary means two.
Okay, I just want to mention that there is one
NOTE CONF
very special binary predicate, which is equality.
We're going to write equality in the usual way like
NOTE CONF
that.
So x equals y.
NOTE CONF
This is true if x and y are the same
thing.
NOTE CONF
In this course we won't get into the reasons why
it's special.
NOTE CONF
So in more advanced logic than it behaves slightly different
from others.
NOTE CONF
But for our purposes It's just a predicate that we're
going to write in a particular way.
NOTE CONF
So I've told you about propositional logic.
I'm just going to put up a little bit about
NOTE CONF
first order logic.
We're not going to do first order logic.
NOTE CONF
It makes us sorry.
First order logic allows us to make more complex statements.
NOTE CONF
So again, let me do a quick check.
These are the symbols usually used in modern maths.
NOTE CONF
How many of you are familiar with these two symbols?
About one fifth or less.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we will introduce them a bit later because they
NOTE CONF
have their uses.
So this is for all.
NOTE CONF
This says for every x p of x is true.
And this says there exists an x such that p
NOTE CONF
of x is true.
So you make statements like this in mathematics like.
NOTE CONF
um, every prime number greater than two is odd or.
I can't think of an existential statement right now, but
NOTE CONF
you make statements that are true of all things, or
you might want to exhibit an example of something.
NOTE CONF
And the thing I want to say now is that
this lets you say an awful lot.
NOTE CONF
So those of you who are CS math students are
probably going to do an analysis course this year, next
NOTE CONF
year.
Third year there is definitely honours analysis, but you probably
NOTE CONF
do some analysis in second year.
And in analysis you will see a concept called a
NOTE CONF
function from the rails to rails being everywhere continuous.
And you will see it written out defined like this.
NOTE CONF
This is a complicated formula.
It says for all something for all something there exists
NOTE CONF
something for all.
Something.
NOTE CONF
And there's an implication.
This is pretty much about the limit of where normal
NOTE CONF
humans can understand formulae.
So mathematicians have ways of understanding much worse formulae by
NOTE CONF
breaking them down.
But it illustrates that first order logic is quite difficult
NOTE CONF
for two reasons.
Firstly, it's hard to understand.
NOTE CONF
This is a very short formula, but it's already quite
hard to understand.
NOTE CONF
And computers can produce formulae that are thousands of pages
long.
NOTE CONF
The other reason first order logic is hard is that
if you write down an arbitrary statement in first order
NOTE CONF
logic about an arbitrary universe, I can't necessarily tell you
whether it's true or not.
NOTE CONF
That's why mathematics is not trivial.
If this were not the case, then mathematics would be
NOTE CONF
a trivial subject.
We could just feed it to a computer and get
NOTE CONF
the answer.
Um, first order logic is what mathematicians use in everyday
NOTE CONF
life and much other reasoning.
It's a remarkably recent discovery about 140 years old.
NOTE CONF
But because it's hard in both these ways, we are
not going to teach you first order logic in this
NOTE CONF
course, except a bit right at the end.
What we're going to do in this course is to
NOTE CONF
teach you something that is a bit more powerful than
propositional logic.
NOTE CONF
It lets you say useful things, but it's manageable.
It's not so hideously complex as first order logic.
NOTE CONF
And so that's what we will introduce next week.
We will introduce the logic that was developed about 2000
NOTE CONF
years ago.
And then we'll spend a few years going through 1500
NOTE CONF
years of logic.
So next week I see you on Tuesday because Don
NOTE CONF
and I are swapping lectures and if anybody has questions
come down.
NOTE CONF